---
title: "1. Hello World"
---

# Chapter 3


The savage or hunter state shortly re­viewed---The shepherd state, or
the tribes of barbarians that overran the Roman Em­pire---The
superiority of the power of popu­lation to the means of
subsistence---the cause of the great tide of Northern Emigra­tion.

In the rudest state of mankind, in which hunting is the prin­cipal
occupation, and the only mode of acquiring food; the means of
subsistence being scattered over a large extent of territory, the
comparative population must necessarily be thin. It is said that the
passion between the sexes is less ardent among the North Ameri­can
Indians, than among any other race of men. Yet, notwith­standing this
apathy, the effort towards population, even in this people, seems to be
always greater than the means to support it. This appears, from the
comparatively rapid population that takes place, whenever any of the
tribes happen to settle in some fertile spot, and to draw nourishment
from more fruitful sources than that of hunting; and it has been
frequently remarked that when an Indian family has taken up its abode
near any European settle­ment, and adopted a more easy and civilized
mode of life, that one woman has reared five, or six, or more children;
though in the sav­age state it rarely happens that above one or two in a
family grow up to maturity. The same observation has been made with
regard to the Hottentots near the Cape. These facts prove the superior
power of population to the means of subsistence in nations of hunters,
and that this power always shews itself the moment it is left to act
with freedom.

It remains to inquire whether this power can be checked, and its effects
kept equal to the means of subsistence, without vice or misery.

The North American Indians, considered as a people, cannot justly be
called free and equal. In all the accounts we have of them, and, indeed,
of most other savage nations, the women are repre­sented as much more
completely in a state of slavery to the men than the poor are to the
rich in civilized countries. One half the nation appears to act as
Helots to the other half, and the misery that checks population falls
chiefly, as it always must do, upon that part whose condition is lowest
in the scale of society. The infancy of man in the simplest state
requires considerable attention, but this necessary attention the women
cannot give, condemned as they are to the inconveniences and hardships
of frequent change of place and to the constant and unremitting drudgery
of preparing every thing for the reception of their tyrannic lords.
These exer­tions, sometimes during pregnancy or with children at their
backs, must occasion frequent miscarriages, and prevent any but the most
robust infants from growing to maturity. Add to these hard­ships of the
women the constant war that prevails among savages, and the necessity
which they frequently labour under of exposing their aged and helpless
parents, and of thus violating the first feel­ings of nature, and the
picture will not appear very free from the blot of misery. In estimating
the happiness of a savage nation, we must not fix our eyes only on the
warrior in the prime of life: he is one of a hundred: he is the
gentleman, the man of fortune, the chances have been in his favour and
many efforts have failed ere this fortunate being was produced, whose
guardian genius should preserve him through the numberless dangers with
which he would be surrounded from infancy to manhood. The true points of
comparison between two nations seem to be the ranks in each which appear
nearest to answer to each other. And in this view, I should compare the
warriors in the prime of life with the gentle­men, and the women,
children, and aged, with the lower classes of the community in civilized
states.

May we not then fairly infer from this short review, or rather, from the
accounts that may be referred to of nations of hunters, that their
population is thin from the scarcity of food, that it would immediately
increase if food was in greater plenty, and that, putting vice out of
the question among savages, misery is the check that represses the
superior power of population and keeps its effects equal to the means of
subsistence. Actual observa­tion and experience tell us that this check,
with a few local and temporary exceptions, is constantly acting now upon
all savage nations, and the theory indicates that it probably acted with
nearly equal strength a thousand years ago, and it may not be much
greater a thousand years hence.

Of the manners and habits that prevail among nations of shepherds, the
next state of mankind, we are even more ignorant than of the savage
state. But that these nations could not escape the general lot of misery
arising from the want of subsistence, Eu­rope, and all the fairest
countries in the world, bear ample testi­mony. Want was the goad that
drove the Scythian shepherds from their native haunts, like so many
famished wolves in search of prey. Set in motion by this all powerful
cause, clouds of Barbarians seemed to collect from all points of the
northern hemisphere. Gathering fresh darkness and terror as they rolled
on, the congre­gated bodies at length obscured the sun of Italy and sunk
the whole world in universal night. These tremendous effects, so long
and so deeply felt throughout the fairest portions of the earth, may be
traced to the simple cause of the superior power of population to the
means of subsistence.

It is well known that a country in pasture cannot support so many
inhabitants as a country in tillage, but what renders nations of
shepherds so formidable is the power which they possess of moving all
together and the necessity they frequently feel of exert­ing this power
in search of fresh pasture for their herds. A tribe that was rich in
cattle had an immediate plenty of food. Even the parent stock might be
devoured in a case of absolute necessity. The women lived in greater
ease than among nations of hunters. The men bold in their united
strength and confiding in their power of procuring pasture for their
cattle by change of place, felt, probably, but few fears about providing
for a family. These combined causes soon produced their natural and
invariable effect, an extended population. A more frequent and rapid
change of place became then necessary. A wider and more extensive
territory was succes­sively occupied. A broader desolation extended all
around them. Want pinched the less fortunate members of the society,
and, at length, the impossibility of supporting such a number together
be­came too evident to be resisted. Young scions were then pushed out
from the parent-stock and instructed to explore fresh regions and to
gain happier seats for themselves by their swords. 'The world was all
before them where to choose.' Restless from present distress, flushed
with the hope of fairer prospects, and animated with the spirit of hardy
enterprise, these daring adventurers were likely to become formidable
adversaries to all who opposed them. The peaceful inhabitants of the
countries on which they rushed could not long withstand the energy of
men acting under such powerful motives of exertion. And when they fell
in with any tribes like their own, the contest was a struggle for
existence, and they fought with a desperate courage, inspired by the
rejection that death was the punishment of defeat and life the prize of
victory.

In these savage contests many tribes must have been utterly
exterminated. Some, probably, perished by hardship and famine. Others,
whose leading star had given them a happier direction, be­came great and
powerful tribes, and, in their turns, sent off fresh adventurers in
search of still more fertile seats. The prodigious waste of human life
occasioned by this perpetual struggle for room and food was more than
supplied by the mighty power of popula­tion, acting, in some degree,
unshackled from the consent habit of emigration. The tribes that
migrated towards the South, though they won these more fruitful regions
by continual battles, rapidly increased in number and power, from the
increased means of sub­sistence. Till at length the whole territory,
from the confines of China to the shores of the Baltic, was peopled by a
various race of Barbarians, brave, robust, and enterprising, inured to
hardship, and delighting in war. Some tribes maintained their
independence. Others ranged themselves under the standard of some
barbaric chieftain who led them to victory after victory, and what was
of more importance, to regions abounding in corn, wine, and oil, the
long wished for consummation, and great reward of their labours. An
Alaric, an Attila, or a Zingis Khan, and the chiefs around them, might
fight for glory, for the fame of extensive conquests, but the true cause
that set in motion the great tide of northern emigra­tion, and that
continued to propel it till it rolled at different peri­ods against
China, Persia, Italy, and even Egypt, was a scarcity of food, a
population extended beyond the means of supporting it.

The absolute population at any one period, in proportion to the extent
of territory, could never be great, on account of the un­productive
nature of some of the regions occupied; but there ap­pears to have been
a most rapid succession of human beings, and as fast as some were mowed
down by the scythe of war or of famine, others rose in increased numbers
to supply their place. Among these bold and improvident Barbarians,
population was probably but little checked, as in modern states, from a
fear of fu­ture difficulties. A prevailing hope of bettering their
condition by change of place, a constant expectation of plunder, a power
even, if distressed, of selling their children as slaves, added to the
natural carelessness of the barbaric character, all conspired to raise a
popu­lation which remained to be repressed afterwards by famine or war.

Where there is any inequality of conditions, and among na­tions of
shepherds this soon takes place, the distress arising from a scarcity of
provisions must fall hardest upon the least fortunate members of the
society. This distress also must frequently have been felt by the women,
exposed to casual plunder in the absence of their husbands, and subject
to continual disappointments in their expected return.

But without knowing enough of the minute and intimate history of these
people, to point out precisely on what part the dis­tress for want of
food chiefly fell, and to what extent it was gener­ally felt, I think we
may fairly say, from all the accounts that we have of nations of
shepherds, that population invariably increased among them whenever, by
emigration or any other cause, the means of subsistence were increased,
and that a further population was checked, and the actual population
kept equal to the means of subsistence, by misery and vice.

For, independently of any vicious customs that might have prevailed
amongst them with regard to women, which always op­erate as checks to
population, it must be acknowledged, I think, that the commission of war
is vice, and the effect of it misery, and none can doubt the misery of
want of food.

