---
title: "1. Hello World"
---

# Chapter 7


A probable cause of epidemics---Extracts from Mr Suessmilch's
tables---Periodical re­turns of sickly seasons to be expected in certain
cases---Proportion of births to buri­als for short periods in any
country an in­adequate criterion of the real average in­crease of
population---Best criterion of a permanent increase of
population---Great frugality of living one of the causes of the famines
of China and Indostan---Evil ten­dency of one of the clauses in Mr
Pitt's Poor Bill---Only one proper way of encouraging
population---Causes of the Happiness of nations---Famine, the last and
most dread­ful mode by which nature represses a re­dundant
population---The three proposi­tions considered as established.

By great attention to cleanliness, the plague seems at length to be
completely expelled from London. But it is not improbable that among the
secondary causes that produce even sickly seasons and epidemics ought to
be ranked a crowded population and un­wholesome and insufficient food. I
have been led to this remark, by looking over some of the tables of Mr
Suessmilch, which Dr Price has extracted in one of his notes to the
postscript on the contro­versy respecting the population of England and
Wales. They are considered as very correct, and if such tables were
general, they would throw great light on the different ways by which
population is repressed and prevented from increasing beyond the means
of subsistence in any country. I will extract a part of the tables, with
Dr Price's remarks.

It may be remarked, that the greatest proportion of births to burials,
was in the five years after the great pestilence.

Is it not probable that in this case the number of inhabitants had
increased faster than the food and the accommodations neces­sary to
preserve them in health? The mass of the people would, upon this
supposition, be obliged to live harder, and a greater number would be
crowded together in one house, and it is not surely improbable that
these were among the natural causes that produced the three sickly
years. These causes may produce such an effect, though the country,
absolutely considered, may not be ex­tremely crowded and populous. In a
country even thinly inhabited, if an increase of population take place,
before more food is raised, and more houses are built, the inhabitants
must be distressed in some degree for room and subsistence. Were the
marriages in Eng­land, for the next eight or ten years, to be more
prolifick than usual, or even were a greater number of marriages than
usual to take place, supposing the number of houses to remain the same,
instead of five or six to a cottage, there must be seven or eight, and
this, added to the necessity of harder living, would probably have a
very unfavourable effect on the health of the common people.

For further information on this subject, I refer the reader to Mr
Suessmilch's tables. The extracts that I have made are suffi­cient to
shew the periodical, though irregular, returns of sickly seasons, and it
seems highly probable that a scantiness of room and food was one of the
principal causes that occasioned them.

It appears from the tables that these countries were increas­ing rather
fast for old states, notwithstanding the occasional sea­sons that
prevailed. Cultivation must have been improving, and marriages,
consequently, encouraged. For the checks to population appear to have
been rather of the positive, than of the preventive kind. When from a
prospect of increasing plenty in any country, the weight that represses
population is in some degree removed, it is highly probable that the
motion will be continued beyond the op­eration of the cause that first
impelled it. Or, to be more particu­lar, when the increasing produce of
a country, and the increasing demand for labour, so far ameliorate the
condition of the labourer as greatly to encourage marriage, it is
probable that the custom of early marriages will continue till the
population of the country has gone beyond the increased produce, and
sickly seasons appear to be the natural and necessary consequence. I
should expect, there­fore, that those countries where subsistence was
increasing suffi­ciency at times to encourage population but not to
answer all its demands, would be more subject to periodical epidemics
than those where the population could more completely accommodate itself
to the average produce.

An observation the converse of this will probably also be found true. In
those countries that are subject to periodical sick­nesses, the increase
of population, or the excess of births above the burials, will be
greater in the intervals of these periods than is usual, caeteris
paribus, in the countries not so much subject to such disorders. If
Turkey and Egypt have been nearly stationary in their average population
for the last century, in the intervals of their periodical plagues, the
births must have exceeded the burials in a greater proportion than in
such countries as France and Eng­land.

The average proportion of births to burials in any country for a period
of five to ten years, will hence appear to be a very in­adequate
criterion by which to judge of its real progress in popula­tion. This
proportion certainly shews the rate of increase during those five or ten
years; but we can by no means thence infer what had been the increase
for the twenty years before, or what would be the increase for the
twenty years after. Dr Price observes that Sweden, Norway, Russia, and
the kingdom of Naples, are increas­ing fast; but the extracts from
registers that he has given are not for periods of sufficient extent to
establish the fact. It is highly probable, however, that Sweden, Norway,
and Russia, are really in­creasing their population, though not at the
rate that the propor­tion of births to burials for the short periods
that Dr Price takes would seem to shew. (See Dr Price's Observations,
Vol. ii, post­script to the controversy on the population of England and
Wales.) For five years, ending in 1777, the proportion of births to
burials in the kingdom of Naples was 144 to 100, but there is reason to
suppose that this proportion would indicate an increase much greater
than would be really found to have taken place in that kingdom during a
period of a hundred years.

Dr Short compared the registers of many villages and mar­ket towns in
England for two periods; the first, from Queen Eliza­beth to the middle
of the last century, and the second, from differ­ent years at the end of
the last century to the middle of the present. And from a comparison of
these extracts, it appears that in the former period the births exceeded
the burials in the propor­tion of 124 to 100, but in the latter, only in
the proportion of 111 to 100. Dr Price thinks that the registers in the
former period are not to be depended upon, but, probably, in this
instance they do not give incorrect proportions. At least there are many
reasons for ex­pecting to find a greater excess of births above the
burials in the former period than in the latter. In the natural progress
of the population of any country, more good land will, caeteris paribus,
be taken into cultivation in the earlier stages of it than in the later.
(I say 'caeteris paribus', because the increase of the produce of any
country will always very greatly depend on the spirit of industry that
prevails, and the way in which it is directed. The knowledge and habits
of the people, and other temporary causes, particularly the degree of
civil liberty and equality existing at the time, must always have great
influence in exciting and directing this spirit.) And a greater
proportional yearly increase of produce will almost invariably be
followed by a greater proportional increase of popu­lation. But, besides
this great cause, which would naturally give the excess of births above
burials greater at the end of Queen Eliza­beth's reign than in the
middle of the present century, I can­not help thinking that the
occasional ravages of the plague in the former period must have had some
tendency to increase this pro­portion. If an average of ten years had
been taken in the intervals of the returns of this dreadful disorder, or
if the years of plague had been rejected as accidental, the registers
would certainly give the proportion of births to burials too high for
the real average in­crease of the population. For some few years after
the great plague in 1666, it is probable that there was a more than
usual excess of births above burials, particularly if Dr Price's
opinion be founded, that England was more populous at the revolution
(which hap­pened only twenty-two years afterwards) than it is at
present.

Mr King, in 1693, stated the proportion of the births to the burials
throughout the Kingdom, exclusive of London, as 115 to 100. Dr Short
makes it, in the middle of the present century, 111 to 100, including
London. The proportion in France for five years, ending in 1774, was 117
to 100. If these statements are near the truth; and if there are no very
great variations at particular peri­ods in the proportions, it would
appear that the population of France and England has accommodated itself
very nearly to the average produce of each country. The discouragements
to mar­riage, the consequent vicious habits, war, luxury, the silent
though certain depopulation of large towns, and the close habitations,
and insufficient food of many of the poor, prevent population from
in­creasing beyond the means of subsistence; and, if I may use an
ex­pression which certainly at first appears strange, supercede the
necessity of great and ravaging epidemics to repress what is re­dundant.
Were a wasting plague to sweep off two millions in Eng­land, and six
millions in France, there can be no doubt whatever that, after the
inhabitants had recovered from the dreadful shock, the proportion of
births to burials would be much above what it is in either country at
present.

In New Jersey, the proportion of births to deaths on an aver­age of
seven years, ending in 1743, was as 300 to 100. In France and England,
taking the highest proportion, it is as 117 to 100. Great and
astonishing as this difference is, we ought not to be so wonder-struck
at it as to attribute it to the miraculous interposi­tion of heaven. The
causes of it are not remote, latent and mysteri­ous; but near us, round
about us, and open to the investigation of every inquiring mind. It
accords with the most liberal spirit of phi­losophy to suppose that not
a stone can fall, or a plant rise, without the immediate agency of
divine power. But we know from experi­ence that these operations of what
we call nature have been con­ducted almost invariably according to fixed
laws. And since the world began, the causes of population and
depopulation have proba­bly been as constant as any of the laws of
nature with which we are acquainted.

The passion between the sexes has appeared in every age to be so nearly
the same that it may always be considered, in alge­braic language, as a
given quantity. The great law of necessity which prevents population
from increasing in any country beyond the food which it can either
produce or acquire, is a law so open to our view, so obvious and evident
to our understandings, and so completely confirmed by the experience of
every age, that we can­not for a moment doubt it. The different modes
which nature takes to prevent or repress a redundant population do not
appear, in­deed, to us so certain and regular, but though we cannot
always predict the mode we may with certainty predict the fact. If the
pro­portion of births to deaths for a few years indicate an increase of
numbers much beyond the proportional increased or acquired pro­duce of
the country, we may be perfectly certain that unless an emigration takes
place, the deaths will shortly exceed the births; and that the increase
that had taken place for a few years cannot be the real average increase
of the population of the country. Were there no other depopulating
causes, every country would, without doubt, be subject to periodical
pestilences or famine.

The only true criterion of a real and permanent increase in the
population of any country is the increase of the means of sub­sistence.
But even, this criterion is subject to some slight varia­tions which
are, however, completely open to our view and obser­vations. In some
countries population appears to have been forced, that is, the people
have been habituated by degrees to live almost upon the smallest
possible quantity of food. There must have been periods in such counties
when population increased permanently, without an increase in the means
of subsistence. China seems to answer to this description. If the
accounts we have of it are to be trusted, the lower classes of people
are in the habit of living almost upon the smallest possible quantity of
food and are glad to get any putrid offals that European labourers would
rather starve than eat. The law in China which permits parents to expose
their children has tended principally thus to force the population. A
nation in this state must necessarily be subject to famines. Where a
country is so populous in proportion to the means of subsistence that
the average produce of it is but barely sufficient to support the lives
of the inhabitants, any deficiency from the badness of seasons must be
fatal. It is probable that the very frugal manner in which the Gentoos
are in the habit of living contributes in some degree to the famines of
Indostan.

In America, where the reward of labour is at present so lib­eral, the
lower classes might retrench very considerably in a year of scarcity
without materially distressing themselves. A famine therefore seems to
be almost impossible. It may be expected that in the progress of the
population of America, the labourers will in time be much less liberally
rewarded. The numbers will in this case permanently increase without a
proportional increase in the means of subsistence.

In the different states of Europe there must be some varia­tions in the
proportion between the number of inhabitants and the quantity of food
consumed, arising from the different habits of liv­ing that prevail in
each state. The labourers of the South of Eng­land are so accustomed to
eat fine wheaten bread that they will suffer themselves to be half
starved before they will submit to live like the Scotch peasants. They
might perhaps in time, by the con­stant operation of the hard law of
necessity, be reduced to live even like the Lower Chinese, and the
country would then, with the same quantity of food, support a greater
population. But to effect this must always be a most difficult, and,
every friend to humanity will hope, an abortive attempt. Nothing is so
common as to hear of en­couragements that ought to be given to
population. If the tendency of mankind to increase be so great as I have
represented it to be, it may appear strange that this increase does not
come when it is thus repeatedly called for. The true reason is that the
demand for a greater population is made without preparing the funds
necessary to support it. Increase the demand for agricultural labour by
pro­moting cultivation, and with it consequently increase the produce of
the country, and ameliorate the condition of the labourer, and no
apprehensions whatever need be entertained of the propor­tional increase
of population. An attempt to effect this purpose in any other way is
vicious, cruel, and tyrannical, and in any state of tolerable freedom
cannot therefore succeed. It may appear to be the interest of the
rulers, and the rich of a state, to force popula­tion, and thereby lower
the price of labour, and consequently the expense of fleets and armies,
and the cost of manufactures for for­eign sale; but every attempt of the
kind should be carefully watched and strenuously resisted by the friends
of the poor, par­ticularly when it comes under the deceitful garb of
benevolence, and is likely, on that account, to be cheerfully and
cordially re­ceived by the common people.

I entirely acquit Mr Pitt of any sinister intention in that clause of
his Poor Bill which allows a shilling a week to every labourer for each
child he has above three. I confess, that before the bill was brought
into Parliament, and for some time after, I thought that such a
regulation would be highly beneficial, but fur­ther reflection on the
subject has convinced me that if its object be to better the condition
of the poor, it is calculated to defeat the very purpose which it has in
view. It has no tendency that I can discover to increase the produce of
the country, and if it tend to in­crease the population, without
increasing the produce, the neces­sary and inevitable consequence
appears to be that the same pro­duce must be divided among a greater
number, and consequently that a day's labour will purchase a smaller
quantity of provisions, and the poor therefore in general must be more
distressed.

I have mentioned some cases where population may perma­nently increase
without a proportional increase in the means of subsistence. But it is
evident that the variation in different states, between the food and the
numbers supported by it, is restricted to a limit beyond which it cannot
pass. In every country, the popula­tion of which is not absolutely
decreasing, the food must be neces­sarily sufficient to support, and to
continue, the race of labourers.

Other circumstances being the same, it may be affirmed that countries
are populous according to the quantity of human food which they produce,
and happy according to the liberality with which that food is divided,
or the quantity which a day's labour will purchase. Corn countries are
more populous than pasture coun­tries, and rice countries more populous
than corn countries. The lands in England are not suited to rice, but
they would all bear potatoes; and Dr Adam Smith observes that if
potatoes were to be­come the favourite vegetable food of the common
people, and if the same quantity of land was employed in their culture
as is now em­ployed in the culture of corn, the country would be able to
support a much greater population, and would consequently in a very
short time have it.

The happiness of a country does not depend, absolutely, upon its poverty
or its riches, upon its youth or its age, upon its being thinly or fully
inhabited, but upon the rapidity with which it is increasing, upon the
degree in which the yearly increase of food approaches to the yearly
increase of an unrestricted population. This approximation is always the
nearest in new colonies, where the knowledge and industry of an old
state operate on the fertile unappropriated land of a new one. In other
cases, the youth or the age of a state is not in this respect of very
great importance. It is probable that the food of Great Britain is
divided in as great plenty to the inhabitants, at the present period, as
it was two thousand, three thousand, or four thousand years ago. And
there is reason to believe that the poor and thinly inhabited tracts of
the Scotch Highlands are as much distressed by an overcharged population
as the rich and populous province of Flanders.

Were a country never to be overrun by a people more ad­vanced in arts,
but left to its own natural progress in civilization; from the time that
its produce might be considered as an unit, to the time that it might be
considered as a million, during the lapse of many hundred years, there
would not be a single period when the mass of the people could be said
to be free from distress, either directly or indirectly, for want of
food. In every state in Europe, since we have first had accounts of it,
millions and millions of hu­man existences have been repressed from this
simple cause; though perhaps in some of these states an absolute famine
has never been known.

Famine seems to be the last, the most dreadful resource of nature. The
power of population is so superior to the power in the earth to produce
subsistence for man, that premature death must in some shape or other
visit the human race. The vices of mankind are active and able ministers
of depopulation. They are the precur­sors in the great army of
destruction; and often finish the dreadful work themselves. But should
they fail in this war of extermination, sickly seasons, epidemics,
pestilence, and plague, advance in ter­rific array, and sweep off their
thousands and ten thousands. Should success be still incomplete,
gigantic inevitable famine stalks in the rear, and with one mighty blow
levels the population with the food of the world.

Must it not then be acknowledged by an attentive examiner of the
histories of mankind, that in every age and in every state in which man
has existed, or does now exist.

That the increase of population is necessarily limited by the means of
subsistence.

That population does invariably increase when the means of subsistence
increase. And that the superior power of population it repressed, and
the actual population kept equal to the means of subsistence, by misery
and vice?

